.. GENBoostGPU documentation master file

GENBoostGPU
===========

**GPU-accelerated elastic net boosting for large-scale methylation and SNP studies.**
GENBoostGPU orchestrates feature preprocessing, Optuna-powered hyperparameter
search, and elastic net boosting on top of RAPIDS, CuPy, and Dask so you can
model thousands of genomic windows in parallel without leaving Python.

Key features
------------

* **Adaptive window orchestration** – distribute :mod:`genboostgpu.orchestration` jobs across one or many GPUs with auto-tuned ``max_in_flight`` concurrency.
* **Automated SNP curation** – zero-variance filtering, missing data imputation, and LD clumping in :mod:`genboostgpu.snp_processing`.
* **Elastic net boosting core** – reproducible variance decomposition and ridge refits from :mod:`genboostgpu.enet_boosting`.
* **Flexible I/O** – load PLINK data, CuPy arrays, or parquet outputs with :mod:`genboostgpu.data_io`.
* **Tuning toolbox** – global and per-window hyperparameter utilities in :mod:`genboostgpu.tuning`, including cohort-wide Optuna refits.
* **Reproducibility guardrails** – documented seeding, metadata capture, and structured logging patterns for consistent reruns.

Supported platforms
-------------------

GENBoostGPU targets Linux with NVIDIA GPUs (Ampere or newer) and CUDA 12.x.
Multi-GPU orchestration requires RAPIDS ``cudf/cuML`` 25.8 and ``dask-cuda`` 25.8
or newer. Development and documentation can be performed on CPU-only machines by
installing the mock/documentation requirements.

Get started
-----------

* :doc:`quickstart` – minimal pipeline example with saved outputs.
* :doc:`installation` – environment setup for CPU docs versus GPU production.
* :doc:`user-guide/index` – deep dives on data formats, workflow, tuning, scaling, and reproducibility.
* :doc:`tutorials/index` – walkthroughs based on the scripts in ``examples/``.
* :doc:`api/index` – autogenerated API reference.
* :doc:`troubleshooting` – common fixes for CUDA, RAPIDS, and Dask issues.
* :doc:`contributing` – guidelines for development, style, and tests.
* :doc:`changelog` – highlights from each release.

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 2
   :caption: Contents

   quickstart
   installation
   user-guide/index
   tutorials/index
   api/index
   troubleshooting
   contributing
   changelog

Citation
--------

If you use GENBoostGPU in academic or industrial work, please cite:

.. epigraph::

   Alexis Bennett and Kynon J.M. Benjamin.
   *GENBoostGPU: GPU-accelerated elastic net boosting for large-scale epigenomics.*
   DOI: `10.5281/zenodo.17238798 <https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.17238798>`_.

Indices and tables
------------------

* :ref:`genindex`
* :ref:`modindex`
* :ref:`search`
